Well, I didn't have Betty Journey to help me out every day, but I've talked to Betty on many occasions.
And most of the time I'm talking to Gwen Davies Helm, who can't be here today,
but she's filled my little head with all sorts of visions.
And then of course there's Hugh Perry, and he says to me, he goes, I'll tell you a story.
But of course it's not the sort of thing you're going to say in front of everybody in the church.
Remember that. You're going to get me in trouble.
So I won't tell you Hugh Perry's story, but I did write a poem.
And I had so much trouble writing this poem, it was sort of like giving birth to twins.
But I'm really not even sure if I finished it.
But I hope Betty and everybody else who was in this church, I hope it's okay.
I couldn't come up with a fancy title, so I just put Seattle's Old Welsh Church at the top.
Let's see if it works, okay?
There's nothing there where the heart once stood, nothing but a sharp stucco box rising rudely,
flush against the sidewalk intruding.
There's no way to tell where the steps used to be, no sacred bit of earth to stand on.
It was meant to be our legacy, a home for us to hand on.
Remember, we all came together there to bear witness to Christenings, marriages, and deaths.
Too untimely to bear alone. Of course we sang on Sundays, and for all the critical moments,
music welled up from the depths, washed over us, and reverberated into the city streets.
It brought us together, cleansed our bitterness and pain, and for a time,
like an unruly current, tore us apart. But all the same, it carried us.
Every year Welsh pilgrims came in a greyhound bus hired from Vancouver, Renton, and Elmira,
Spokane and Black Diamond, an instant choir.
Croissant, Mr. Thomas! Hello, Mr. Jones! Handshakes around, eyes on fire.
Hello, Mr. Parry! Have you seen Mr. Pritchard? Do you remember my friend?
Then one deep, rolling thunder struck. Amen. A gaman vagani has begun.
Songs of praises I will ever give to thee echoed in the moving part to feed the soul and touch the heart.
A great baptism through immersion in this blended harmony.
Then downstairs the tables white, a feast of ham, cakes, and cups of tea,
and everything a lovely sight to feed this Cumbric family.
Some of us married and moved away. Death and indifference took its toll.
But we always expected the church to stay.
It had married us, carried us, and buried us. It was the sun our universe went round.
The guardian of our Cambrian sound.
A place to heal here I snagging pain, a shelter from the winter rain,
where God's great spirit lived within to comfort us and sponge our sin.
Then behind closed doors in other places from strangers' mouths on strangers' faces,
they said it's really not a church at all. It's an ethnic playground past its prime.
The pews sit half empty all the time. It's just a steepled stained glass social hall.
Then a scratching pen declared its fate. It's just a piece of real estate.
But all those who lived both far and near remembered then the joyful noise,
the bronze plaque tribute to our boys that died in the Great War.
Remember the organ full of praise, the great steaming pots of tea, daffodils, china, and silver trays.
And remembered our Cumbric community.
There was Mr. Pritchard and Mrs. Hughes. And all the faces that filled the pews.
The strolling chorus walking home. The sweet, full, and heartfelt tone.
If there is power in remembering and words can let you see through the stucco boxes to know,
there still remains, despite the pen and the wrecking ball, a Seattle Cumbric community.
Thank you.
Applause